# Generic_model_paper

This repository contains the code associated to the paper "Quantifying the impact of bacterial vaccines against antibiotic resistance: accounting for transmission and selection dynamics" (Chloé Aupépin, Lulla Opatowski, Stéphane Loisel, Laura Temime, Quentin Leclerc).

## Overview
Vaccines are a new potential tool to act against antimicrobial resistance (AMR). Here we construct a generic model paper to investigate the impacts of vaccines on AMR. 

## Repo contents 
- [scripts](./scripts): R codes to generate all the analyses in the manuscript and supplementary
- [files](./files): files used in analyses, generated by R codes in scripts folder
- [figures](./figures): figures in the manuscript and supplementary

## Installation guide
Users should install R 4.4.2 (with the associated Rtools if using a windows environment) and RStudio, and download this repository git.
Users should then open RStudio and create a new project from an existing directory and choose the folder just downloaded as the existing directory.

Once the project is created and opened, users should install the following packages, from an `R` terminal:

```
install.packages(c("dplyr", "here", "purrr", "tidyr", "deSolve", "furrr", "stringr", "ggplot2", "ggh4x", "scales","lhs","patchwork", "ggrepel", "parallel", "epiR"))
```

## User guide

### Scripts description

#### Folder utils
This folder contains usefull functions to use for all other scripts

#### Model
- [model.R](./scripts/model.R) : R code containing model equations.

#### Identifying key parameters 
- [identifying_key_parameters_for_eq.R](./scripts/identifying_key_parameters_for_eq.R) : R code to identify key bacterial and antibiotic parameters on equilibria.
- [identifying_key_parameters_for_vaccine_impact.R](./scripts/identifying_key_parameters_for_vaccine_impact.R) : R code to identify key bacterial, antibiotic and vaccine parameters on differences induced by vaccines on different outputs.

#### Case studies 
- [find_model_parameters_S_aureus.R](./scripts/find_model_parameters_S_aureus.R) : R code to optimise 3 model parameters to _S. aureus_ caracteristics. 
- [find_model_parameters_E_coli.R](./scripts/find_model_parameters_E_coli.R) : R code to optimise 3 model parameters to _E. coli_ caracteristics.
- [why_keep_f_constant.R](./scripts/why_keep_f_constant.R) : R code to explain why the relative fitness isn't varied during the case studies analyses
- [run_vaccination_impact_analysis.R](./scripts/run_vaccination_impact_analysis.R) : R code to generate vaccination impact on both bacteria
- [run_antibiotic_impact_analysis.R](./scripts/run_antibiotic_impact_analysis.R) : R code to generate antibiotic reduction impact on both bacteria
- [vaccine_impact_on_R0.R](./scripts/vaccine_impact_on_R0.R) : R code to generate vaccination impact on reproduction numbers

#### Plots
- [generate_plots.R](./scripts/generate_plots.R) : R code to generate plots

### Executing order

#### Step 1 : identification of key parameters
For figures 2, 3, S2 and S3, run [identifying_key_parameters_for_eq.R](./scripts/identifying_key_parameters_for_eq.R) and [identifying_key_parameters_for_vaccine_impact.R](./scripts/identifying_key_parameters_for_vaccine_impact.R) 

#### Step 2 : find model parameters 
Run [find_model_parameters_S_aureus.R](./scripts/find_model_parameters_S_aureus.R) to obtain _S. aureus_ parameters (stored in file [S_aureus_params10.csv](./files/S_aureus_params10.csv)

Run [find_model_parameters_E_coli.R](./scripts/find_model_parameters_E_coli.R) to obtain _E. coli_ parameters (stored in file [E_coli_params_primavera4.csv](./files/E_coli_params_primavera4.csv)

#### Step 3 : Run analyses 

First start by running [run_vaccination_impact_analysis.R](./scripts/run_vaccination_impact_analysis.R), then [run_antibiotic_impact_analysis.R](./scripts/run_antibiotic_impact_analysis.R) and finally [vaccine_impact_on_R0.R](./scripts/vaccine_impact_on_R0.R). 
Comment and decomment the corresponding line codes to have the results for _S. aureus_ or  _E. coli_.

Respecting this order is mandatory because equilibrium computations from the first script are stored in the [files](./files) folder and reused for the next two scripts. 

#### Step 4 : Generate plots
Run [generate_plots.R](./scripts/generate_plots.R) to generate all plots which are saved in the [figures](./figures) folder. 
